How does Google Analytics calculate average time on page,
and average session duration?
The explanation can get a little bit detailed.
The moral of the story is going to be use time metrics comparatively.
So, don't be overly concerned about the actual time metric calculations.
We'll recall from previous sections that when a pageview is sent to Google Analytics,
it contains many fields including the timestamp.
The HIT timestamp is the basis of the time metrics calculation in
GA. Time metrics calculation can be a little bit surprising at first.
Let's walk through an example.
Let's say that someone lands on page A on your website at 10 o'clock,
GA actually does not start calculating time
until another pageview is sent with another timestamp.
GA time metrics are based on the differential between timestamps of Hits.
Now that we have sent another pageview HIT into GA,
the time on page A is five minutes,
and session duration is now five minutes.
These calculations don't happen in real-time.
This of course, happens during the processing.
Now, page B doesn't have a time on page,
and the session duration doesn't increase until we access page C. At that point,
time on page for page B is two minutes,
and session duration has incremented,
page D will send another timestamp.
So, now we have time on page for page C,
session duration is incremented.
But what happens when the user gets that 31 minute phone call and the session expires?
In this case, if page E is sent to Google Analytics 31 minutes after page D,
a new session begins.
Page D does not get any time on page,
because it's considered the exit page,
or the previous session.
Now, the clock has started ticking on a new session.
When page F is sent to GA,
we have time on page of six minutes for page E,
and session duration of six minutes for the second session,
and the process continues.